<h1>14. Metadata </h1></br><h1>1 - Archival Metadata Hardware used</h1> Today, we are going to talk about archival metadata, archival metadata is just one of the types of metadata that's so important for Information Interchange. Let me first motivate the topic. The hardware I have used includes Gutenberg hand-set lead types. This is what they look like when you set them up before you put them in the printing press. I worked in a small newspaper printing house from fifth grade to eighth grade. Early in college, I used punch card to submit my programs for better processing. I have of course used record players. I still have about 6 feet of vinyls. VCRs, I may even still have one in my house. In addition to those I've used 8-bit paper tape readers following the punch card error, I've used a manual edition machine with anvil, I used an old gear computer in Scandinavia with an external magnetic drum and 1K of 42-bit double word memory, wow. I've used 8-tracks, big reel tape recorders and big magnetic disk packs. Now let's take a look at what hardware you have used. First of all, you have all used the Atari, you have used to Walkman, you've used a Nintendo and you've used the Super Nintendo. Looks like you had more fun than I did.

<h1>3 - The Question</h1> With all the different kinds of hardware that I have used and you have used the big question is, how do you make sure you can read your stuff a 100 years from now?

<h1>4 - Preservation Metadata OAIS Information Model</h1> To try to answer that question, I want to talk with you about preservation metadata and the OAIS information model. In the late 90's, at the request of the International Organization for Standardization, IOS, the Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems, CCSDS, started developing an archive standard for long term storage of data in digital form. Initial report was released in 1999 for the open archival information system reference model. This model went through very thorough review and got feedback from a number of additional organizations outside of the space community such as the Library of Congress and Nesson Archives and Records Administration. That's the model I want to briefly talk with you about today.

<h1>5 - OAIS Information Model</h1> Three so-called information packages are important when digital data is archived. The first one is the submission information package. It is the information that's submitted together with the data that's going to be archived, at the point in time, that the archive receives this information. Then, an archived information package is prepared, that's the information package that is used by the archive during the period of time the data is in the archive. Finally, there's a dissemination information package. Which is the meta data package that is used, as portions of the information in the archive is shared with others. Each one of these information packages consists of three things; content information, preservation description information, packaging information and descriptive information. I'm going to show you some additional detail, of the archived information package. So, looking first at the content information, here are the details of them.

<h1>6 - Content Information Package</h1> The content information is just one of four collections of metadata that's needed in each one of the three information packages that are prepared during the archival of digital information. Before I proceed with the presentation of the details of the content information, let me share with you what my real intent is. My intent is not really to make you understand all the details of this and make you remember all the details of this. My intent merely is to share with you the massive amount of metadata that is needed for long-term archival of digital data. Okay. So, here we go. The first part of the content information is the content data object. The content data object is the bit stream which is being preserved. The representation information consists of structural metadata and semantic metadata. The structure of metadata expresses what the data formats and data structures are in the data that's being preserved. The semantics expresses the meaning with English names and prose, and so on, as to what the data that's being preserved really means. The content data object description is a human readable data structure description. It contains the structural types such as whether things are images, sound, text, web documents, executables, etc. There's a file description. There's information like access inhibitors, encryption, watermarks, etc, access facilitators like time markers, lengths, and so on. The second part of the representation information is environment descriptions. It consists of two things; software environment and hardware environment. The operating system information includes things such as the operating system name, the version of it, the location of it, and the documentation of it. Then, there's the rendering programs. What kind of transformation process necessary to allow rendering of the data object? What's the transformation engine? Any parameters needed? What's the input format? The output format? Location of the rendering program? Documentation for it, etc, etc, etc. Metadata about the hardware environment includes location of it, documentation of it. It includes which computation resources are needed, processor requirements, memory requirements, documentation, the storage requirements, and finally, which peripherals are required and where's the documentation for those peripherals.

<h1>7 - OAIS Information Model   part 02</h1> So, that completes the content information metadata. Next, let's take a look at the preservation description information.

<h1>8 - Preservation Description Information</h1> The preservation description information consists of reference information, context information, provenance information and fixity information. The archival system identification consists of the system ID, the value, construction method, responsible agency and additional information. There is a global identifier with a value, construction method and a responsible agency for that identification. Finally, on the reference information there is resource description, existing metadata, and existing records. That brings us to the context information some of which includes relationships between this object and other objects, information about the relationships between this object and other manifestations of the same object, what the type of relationship is. The provenance information contains the complete history of the information throughout it's lifetime. Where did it originate? How was it created? What was the history before ingest to the archival system? What was the process that was used during the ingest event? What's the history of archival rights management? Each one of these events throughout the lifetime, origin, pre-ingest, ingest, archival retention, rights management, will have a name, procedure, date, responsible agency, and outcome, and notes. Fixity information refers to the authentication method for the object. Digital signature, watermark, check sum, etc,. Both the type, procedure, date and result are part of the fixity information.

<h1>9 - OAIS Information Model   part 03</h1> So, now I've talked about the content information, the preservation description information, and I got two more to go just for the archival information package. After that of course, I would have to talk to you about the submission information package and the dissemination information package. I hope that by now, I managed to impress on you the massive amount of metadata that's needed for the long-term archival of digital information.

<h1>10 - Standards for Archival Metadata are not mature</h1> There are a number of standards for archival metadata and they are constantly evolving. One that I particularly like is the ISO 11179 Specification and Standardization of Data Elements. Very very informative about what metadata looks like and what kind of metadata is needed. Then, there's the OAIS reference model I just presented. It exists in newer versions than the one I pointed you to before and it includes the process that sits around all the archival activities. It includes extended entity relationship diagrams between all the different kinds of metadata that I've talked to you about. Then, there's the OASIS Registry/Repository for XML Schemas.

<h1>11 - Metadata Representation Standards</h1> Many different metadata representations standards have evolved over the last 15 years or longer. They are constantly evolving. Among some of the better-known activities are XML, XML Schema, OWL, RDF, the Dublin Core, XML METS, VERS, AIP, and MOF. Take a look at those lots of interesting reading.

<h1>12 - Several elements are necessary</h1> The creation and evolution of a metadata registry is a very complex process. To be successful several elements are needed. The first element is the initial creation of the metadata schemata. It is very important that this process is done well. The reason is that software will be developed to access the registry and you don't want that software to be rewritten as the registry evolves. It is sort of an anchor that will hold you back in future evolution of that registry so subsequent creation of new metadata schemata must be a controlled process so you do not get two radical changes. A process for the long term controlled evolution maintenance as use of the metadata schemata must be created. Finally, of course, tools must be in place to support the development and evolution and control of the metadata registry.

